Our Trade Policy is aimed at promoting sustainable development, growth and strengthening our international partnerships.

In a world where countries are looking to diversify their supply chains, we have an opportunity to increase our exports across the globe.

We have a diverse economy, high-quality manufacturing facilities and strong regulatory frameworks.

We are strengthening our capacity for trade negotiations and expanding our missions abroad to drive economic diplomacy.

Amid the turmoil in the global economy, we are supporting our established industries in the face of strong headwinds.

We have moved to revive our ferrochrome industry and to protect jobs in our steel, automotive and other sectors which employ hundreds of thousands of South Africans in good quality jobs.

We are working with businesses and workers to close loopholes in our tariff structure and develop additional measures to protect and grow our manufacturing base.

As we protect jobs in vulnerable industries, we remained focused on sectors that will drive future growth.

We know that we can create millions of good quality jobs in sectors such as agriculture, mining, services and the green economy.

These are areas where we can be more than competitive. We can be the best in the world. Our agriculture sector is expanding rapidly.

Already, we are the second largest exporter of citrus fruit in the world.

We are opening new markets for our exports, from citrus and avocados to maize, livestock, grapes and wine.

Through the Blended Finance Scheme, working with the Land Bank and commercial banks, we have provided R7.8 billion in innovative funding to black producers.

We will deploy 10 000 new Extension Officers to support farmers and improve agricultural productivity. This will give rise to many opportunities for young people to be employed in the agricultural sector.

While the rest of our agriculture sector is thriving, the cattle industry is today facing one of the worst outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) our country has ever experienced.

This disease is damaging our economy, resulting in export bans, trade restrictions and devastation of herds.

We have decided to vaccinate the national herd of 14 million cattle. This requires 28 million vaccines over the next 12 months.

The state will facilitate the acquisition of the vaccines centrally to ensure that we get the right vaccine for the particular strain of the virus in South Africa.

We will work closely with the private sector to enable efficient rollout and most importantly, we will ensure that commercial, private and communal farmers have immediate access to vaccines.

I have established a task team made up of farmer organisations and experts, working together with the Minister of Agriculture and his department, that will report to me monthly about the progress we are making in dealing with this pandemic.

We have classified foot-and-mouth disease as a national disaster and will be mobilising all necessary capabilities within the state to deal with this crisis.

Our services sector, from digital technology to financial services, is growing.

Our financial institutions are some of the best in the world and they have the ability to compete in Africa and across the globe.

We are attracting major investment in digital infrastructure, with 55 data centres already built and more than R50 billion of investment expected over the next three years.

Tourism is a vital driver of economic growth, with every 13 international tourist arrivals supporting one job.

Our tourism sector made history last year, recording the arrival of 10.5 million visitors.

We must now promote unique cultural, historical and natural attractions that reflect the country’s identity.

This can include traditional festivals, local crafts, historical sites and natural landscapes across our country and in rural areas as well.

As we strengthen our criminal justice system, we will make areas safer for tourists to visit.

In the coming year, we will extend the Electronic Travel Authorisation System to all countries that require a visa, enabling applications for tourists to be processed digitally within 24 hours.

The biggest opportunity of all lies in green growth. We are pivoting our economy to be a leading supplier of the products which the world will rely on in decades to come.

We are expanding support for the manufacturing of green products for global markets, from fertiliser to jet fuel, chemicals to steel.

From March this year, we will introduce a 150% tax deduction for investment in new energy vehicles, while supporting the local production of batteries.

International pledges to the Just Energy Transition Investment Plan now stand at approximately R250 billion. This is financing large-scale investment in manufacturing, infrastructure and skills.

South Africa has some of the world’s largest reserves of critical minerals.

Our iron ore reserves are valued at more than R40 trillion, making mining a sunrise industry.

After many years of declining investment in exploration, we are dedicating funds towards geological mapping and exploration to harness our critical mineral reserves.

Just this week, the Industrial Development Corporation announced more than R300 million in funding for the Frontier Rare Earths Project in the Northern Cape.

This has the potential to become one of the world’s largest and lowest cost new producers of minerals that are needed for smartphones, lithium batteries and other products.

Confidence in the future of South African mining was very evident during the Mining Indaba held this week here in Cape Town.

New gold, copper, rare earths, platinum and coal mines are being opened.

At the G20 Leaders’ Summit in November last year, the G20 countries supported our proposal to expand local beneficiation of critical minerals and the export of finished products.

Over the course of the first five South Africa Investment Conferences, we were able to raise R1.5 trillion in investment commitments.

To date, over R600 billion has flowed into projects. New factories, mines and other facilities are being opened each year.

We have now set ourselves a target of raising R2 trillion in new investments over the next five years.

We therefore look forward to hosting the sixth South Africa Investment Conference on 31 March 2026.

To build a more inclusive economy, we are going to back those who create opportunity.

If every small and medium business in South Africa could employ one additional person, we would create three million new jobs; however, many of these businesses, a number of which are owned by women and young people, cannot get funding to start or to grow. Many struggle to find markets for their goods and services.

Nearly all small and medium enterprises have to contend with a multitude of regulations, by-laws, licensing requirements and bureaucratic hurdles.

We take seriously the public comments on the draft Business Licensing Bill and will ensure that the final Bill makes it easier, not harder, to start and run a small business in South Africa.

This year, we will provide more than R2.5 billion in funding to over 180 000 small and medium enterprises, and extend a further R1 billion in guarantees.

Naturally we will seek to also focus on women-and youth-led businesses to foster their empowerment.

We will amend the National Credit Act regulations to make it easier to access credit at a lower cost.

The transformation of our economy is necessary to drive sustained growth, reduce inequality and correct the injustices of the past.

We are undertaking a review to refine, re-align and strengthen our Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment framework to ensure that it supports greater transformation and inclusive growth.

All of these actions will create a stronger economy and fix the foundations that were broken.

It is a matter of national concern that too many South Africans remain unemployed and too many young people struggle to find their first job.

That is why as we rebuild the economy, we are creating work and livelihood opportunities on a large scale through public and social employment programmes.

In places like Standerton in Mpumalanga, the Presidential Employment Stimulus is creating work that matters, turning dumping sites into parks and empty yards into community gardens.

The SA Youth platform has provided millions of young people with access to work and learning opportunities for the first time.

The Youth Employment Service (YES), a partnership between business and government, placed over 200 000 young people in year-long work experience opportunities.

This year, we will introduce regulatory changes that will make it much easier for businesses to participate in the YES programme and create jobs for young people.

In the coming year, we will expand our public employment programmes, including the CWP, EPWP and the Presidential Employment Stimulus.

We will ensure they are better coordinated to provide income support, skills development and pathways into longer-term work, particularly for young people and women.

To ensure that no one is left behind, we are implementing decision to increase employment equity targets of persons with disabilities in the Public Service to 7% by 2030, and to mandate a 7% preferential procurement target across all government and public entities.

Above all, however, a strong economy relies on a well-educated, capable and skilled population. Our focus now is on establishing a firm foundation for learning in the early years of a child’s life.

We are expanding access to early childhood development (ECD) through the Bana Pele mass registration of ECD facilities and an increase in subsidies for ECD learners. By making Grade R compulsory, we are getting all children off to a good start.

We are intensifying efforts to fix the basic education system, with a focus on early learning, literacy and numeracy, and mother-tongue based bilingual education.

We congratulate the Matric Class of 2025, which achieved an 88% pass rate.

This is the highest pass rate in our history, reflecting both the commitment of learners and the interventions we have made to improve learning and teaching in schools.

As we welcome improvements in the Matric pass rate, we must address the high dropout rate in the last few years of schooling. More learners must be able to write Matric and select subjects such as maths and science, that will enable them to progress further.

To enable the youth of today to transform our society and secure their future, we are preparing the ground for a skills revolution.

We are undertaking a fundamental overhaul of the skills development system to implement a dual training model that integrates education with practical workplace experience.

We will reform and reduce the number of Sector Education and Training Authorities to improve governance, strengthen industry participation, raise the quality of training and better align skills development with the needs of the economy.

This includes improving the use of Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) colleges as the primary sites for occupational training and artisan development.

To support effective workplace-based learning, we will increase the proportion of the skills development levy returned to employers, restoring it to its original level of 40%.

We will also transform the National Skills Fund into a more agile, outcomes-driven instrument that supports unemployed young people to access workplace experience and employment, building on successful initiatives such as Jobs Boost.

These reforms will ensure that various training programmes we have in government are a door to opportunity, not a dead end.

To absorb the increasing number of young people passing Matric, we will expand opportunities for young people to enter institutions of higher learning.

I have directed the Ministers of Finance and Higher Education to work on a proposal to build more universities and TVET colleges with specialised areas of focus.

An immediate problem is the great shortage of student accommodation at our institutions of higher learning. I have directed the Minister of Higher Education to address this challenge, working with financial institutions on innovative ways in which government can provide student accommodation.

A stronger South Africa is built on strong communities, and strong communities look after their children.

More than a quarter of children under five years are stunted, increasing their risk of disease and affecting their ability to learn and grow. This is devastating for children and their families and has an impact on our society as a whole.

This year, we will embark on a mission to end child stunting by 2030 and tackle malnutrition among young children, in line with the National Strategy to Accelerate Action for Children.

We will focus on the crucial first 1 000 days of a child’s life.

Building on existing support such as the Child Support Grant, we will implement targeted interventions to ensure that pregnant women and low birth-weight children get the protein and nutrients that they need.

This is a massive crisis that demands attention and resources. The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement will set out a clear allocation for the actions we need to take.

A major contributor to child stunting is excessive alcohol consumption, which can affect a child’s development during pregnancy.

Alcohol abuse leads to violence, road accidents and crime.

To address this scourge, we call on provincial governments to strengthen the regulation of alcohol by limiting the density of liquor outlets, restricting trading hours and ending the sale of alcohol in large containers.

As national government, we have proposed measures to curb excessive alcohol use, including minimum unit pricing or higher excise duties and greater restrictions on alcohol advertising, which we are consulting on with stakeholders.

Since it was introduced during COVID-19, the SRD Grant has kept millions of South Africans out of food poverty.

As a transformative instrument to improve the lives of the poorest and most vulnerable people, this grant will be continued.

This year, we will redesign the grant to more effectively support livelihoods, skills development, work opportunities and productive activity.

We know that most of the money provided through social grants is spent on food and transport. In our cities and towns, most people live far away from workplaces and services.

We are re-making our cities and reducing the cost of living for working families by expanding affordable housing and revitalising commuter rail.

We are introducing a new model for housing, where people are given subsidies for ownership and rental in areas that are suitable for them.

We are shifting from building houses for people to supporting them to build, buy or rent their own housing.

Yesterday marked the 60th anniversary of the declaration of District Six as a White Group Area.

A couple of hundred metres from where we are now, more than 60 000 residents were forcibly removed and relocated to the Cape Flats.

The destruction of District Six is a painful reminder of our shared responsibility to redress the injustices of the past and to build vibrant and cohesive communities.

The restitution claim lodged in 1998 affirmed the lawful right of former residents and their descendants to come home. That return has required court supervision, detailed planning and sustained public investment.

Many homes have been completed and handed over to verified claimants. With R500 million allocated to this work, we are proceeding with Phase 4 of construction. The restoration of District Six is a goal that we all seek and responsibility that we must all shoulder. 

We are working to build a healthy nation.
As part of preparation for the National Health Insurance, we are investing in health facilities, personnel and systems to improve access to quality care.

We will be undertaking substantial investment in health infrastructure, prioritising the construction and revitalisation of academic hospitals. During a recent visit to George Mukhari Hospital in Ga-Rankuwa, I witnessed the dire effects of inadequate health infrastructure.

Starting with George Mukhari Hospital, we will be working with various public and private financing institutions to finance the building and revitalisation of healthcare facilities.

As a nation, we are finally able to imagine a country without AIDS.

In support of our programmes to prevent and ultimately eliminate the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), we will be undertaking a massive rollout of Lenacapavir, a six-monthly injection that has proven highly effective in preventing HIV transmission.

We are also working to end cervical cancer in our country by mobilising society to ensure that every young girl between the ages of 9 and 15 receives the HPV vaccine.

Last year, we classified gender-based violence and femicide (GBVF) as a national disaster.

Through this classification, we are able to better coordinate our response and direct efforts towards the most impactful interventions.

Building on the National Strategic Plan on GBVF, we will mobilise all sectors of society through communication and social mobilisation to challenge harmful attitudes and practices.

We will continue to promote women’s economic empowerment through training, financial support and preferential procurement.

We will strengthen law enforcement through faster investigation, improved case management, expanded sexual offences courts and action against repeat offenders.

We will scale up survivor-centred support, ensuring access to shelters, one-stop service centres, mobile and rural outreach and the placement of Social Workers in police stations.

Illegal immigration poses a risk to our security, stability and economic progress.

We will address this problem while ensuring that the fundamental human rights of every person in this country are upheld and protected.

This year, we will take additional steps to secure our borders. Funding to strengthen border security will be prioritised, covering infrastructure, technology and people.

Key border posts will be re-developed through public-private partnerships and will extend the Electronic Travel Authorisation to all international airports and the busiest land ports of entry.



We are already using drones and technology to greater effect all along our border line.

The SAPS, Department of Home Affairs (DHA) and Labour Inspectors will work together to crack down on violations of existing immigration, labour and other laws.

Employers that hire foreign nationals without the required visas will face the full might of the law. To tighten enforcement, we will hire an additional 10 000 labour inspectors this year.

As we undertake these interventions, we insist that the laws of our country must be observed by everyone.

We will not tolerate violence and other acts of lawlessness directed at foreign nationals.
