The destruction of District Six is a painful reminder of our shared responsibility to redress the injustices of the past and to build vibrant and cohesive communities.

The restitution claim lodged in 1998 affirmed the lawful right of former residents and their descendants to come home. That return has required court supervision, detailed planning and sustained public investment.

Many homes have been completed and handed over to verified claimants. With R500 million allocated to this work, we are proceeding with Phase 4 of construction. The restoration of District Six is a goal that we all seek and responsibility that we must all shoulder. 

We are working to build a healthy nation.
As part of preparation for the National Health Insurance, we are investing in health facilities, personnel and systems to improve access to quality care.

We will be undertaking substantial investment in health infrastructure, prioritising the construction and revitalisation of academic hospitals. During a recent visit to George Mukhari Hospital in Ga-Rankuwa, I witnessed the dire effects of inadequate health infrastructure.

Starting with George Mukhari Hospital, we will be working with various public and private financing institutions to finance the building and revitalisation of healthcare facilities.

As a nation, we are finally able to imagine a country without AIDS.

In support of our programmes to prevent and ultimately eliminate the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), we will be undertaking a massive rollout of Lenacapavir, a six-monthly injection that has proven highly effective in preventing HIV transmission.

We are also working to end cervical cancer in our country by mobilising society to ensure that every young girl between the ages of 9 and 15 receives the HPV vaccine.

Last year, we classified gender-based violence and femicide (GBVF) as a national disaster.

Through this classification, we are able to better coordinate our response and direct efforts towards the most impactful interventions.

Building on the National Strategic Plan on GBVF, we will mobilise all sectors of society through communication and social mobilisation to challenge harmful attitudes and practices.

We will continue to promote women’s economic empowerment through training, financial support and preferential procurement.

We will strengthen law enforcement through faster investigation, improved case management, expanded sexual offences courts and action against repeat offenders.

We will scale up survivor-centred support, ensuring access to shelters, one-stop service centres, mobile and rural outreach and the placement of Social Workers in police stations.

Illegal immigration poses a risk to our security, stability and economic progress.

We will address this problem while ensuring that the fundamental human rights of every person in this country are upheld and protected.

This year, we will take additional steps to secure our borders. Funding to strengthen border security will be prioritised, covering infrastructure, technology and people.

Key border posts will be re-developed through public-private partnerships and will extend the Electronic Travel Authorisation to all international airports and the busiest land ports of entry.



We are already using drones and technology to greater effect all along our border line.

The SAPS, Department of Home Affairs (DHA) and Labour Inspectors will work together to crack down on violations of existing immigration, labour and other laws.

Employers that hire foreign nationals without the required visas will face the full might of the law. To tighten enforcement, we will hire an additional 10 000 labour inspectors this year.

As we undertake these interventions, we insist that the laws of our country must be observed by everyone.

We will not tolerate violence and other acts of lawlessness directed at foreign nationals.

No foreign national should be unlawfully barred from accessing public facilities, including schools and health facilities.

To build a stronger South Africa, we need an ethical, capable, and developmental state.

A capable state needs committed and honest public servants with the right skills and a deep culture of service.

Over the past year, we have passed significant new legislation to professionalise the Public Service.

The Public Service Amendment Bill will protect key appointments from political interference and ensure that capable and qualified people are appointed to senior positions on the basis of their suitability for the job.

Lifestyle audits have been made mandatory for senior public servants, reaching 93% compliance across departments last year.

We are establishing a central registry for disciplinary cases across all spheres of government. This will prevent people who are facing or have undergone disciplinary action from being employed elsewhere in the State.

We are continuing to improve the governance and performance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) such as Eskom, Transnet, Denel, Prasa and several others.

This includes the implementation of clear standards for appointments to ensure that the leaders of these entities have the right qualifications and experience.

We will continue to work in a phased manner towards a centralised model for managing our SOE portfolio so that we can set standards, improve governance and ensure financial sustainability to deliver on their mandates.

This includes finalising the National State Enterprises Bill in line with this approach.

We will harness digital transformation as a driver of growth, inclusion and effective service delivery.

This year, the DHA will launch a Digital ID to enable safe and secure use of digital services for all South Africans.

We will digitise driver’s licenses, Matric certificates and services at the Master’s Office. Citizens will be able to fill out police statements online and eligibility for South African Social Security Agency grants can be tested remotely.

All these services will be made available on the MyMzansi platform.

Soon, every South African will be able to access many of the services they need without visiting a government office or filling out manual forms.

This year alone, hundreds more bank branches will now offer Smart ID and passport services, decreasing queues and waiting times.

We will also work with civil society to ensure that citizen’s protections and rights are safeguarded through this digital revolution.

For South Africa to be strong, the African continent must be at peace and it must prosper.

To advance the values of our Constitution, to promote our national interest, we seek a world that is sustainable, just and inclusive.

In an increasingly volatile world, South Africa holds firm to the principles that defined our G20 Presidency and underpin our Foreign Policy: Solidarity, Equality, Sustainability.

Through our position in the African Union (AU) and the Southern African Development Community (SADC), we are advancing regional integration, peace and stability.

We are using our international relations to support domestic economic priorities, including manufacturing, value addition and export growth.

We are contributing to the implementation of the African Continental Free Trade Area to expand trade between African countries, drive industrialisation and create jobs.

South African firms – our banks, farmers and manufacturers – will be leading suppliers to an African market of 1.4 billion people whose working age population will double in the next 25 years.

We are building mutually beneficial relationships with all countries on terms of equality and respect.

In a world where powerful nations often assert their dominance and influence over less powerful states, our country’s commitment to sovereignty and self-determination is sacrosanct. It is not negotiable.

We will stand firm on our sovereignty and promote our national interests, values and the rights of our people.

We are clear that we will continue to respect the rights and sovereignty of other nations, but we must be equally clear that we will not be bullied by any other country.

We will forge strong partnerships with like-minded countries to increase our shared resilience to global disruptions.

Building on our Presidency of the G20, which all attest to have been successful, we continue to advance the priorities of the Global South.

These include inclusive growth, debt relief, climate action, reform of global governance institutions and the beneficiation critical minerals at source.

Drawing on the work of the G20 Extraordinary Committee on Global Inequality we are working with our international partners towards launching the International Panel on Inequality.

This is an important pillar of the global effort to reduce inequality within and between countries. We continue to champion multilateralism and strengthen humanitarian diplomacy.

South Africa remains a clear and consistent voice for international law, justice and human rights.

South Africa will continue supporting conflict prevention and peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations (UN), AU and SADC. We are proud of the participation of South African soldiers in peacekeeping missions in many parts of the African continent since the advent of democracy.

We have requested the UN to allow us to withdraw our troops from the UN Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with a view to consolidating our Defence Force.

We cannot consider ourselves free for as long as the people of Palestine, Cuba, Sudan, Western Sahara and elsewhere suffer occupation, oppression and war.

Fellow South Africans,

Our nation has reached a turning point.

We are leaving behind an era of decline and turning towards an era of prosperity and growth.

We have done much to overcome the effects of state capture, the COVID-19 pandemic, the public unrest of 2021 and the recent devastating floods.

We are turning towards hope and the reality of a better future for all.

The progress we have made over the last five years gives us hope and encouragement. It shows what we can achieve when we work together. Now is not the time to rest.

Now is the time for all South Africans to be part of taking our country forward.

Last year, we embarked on a new chapter in our democracy, launching a National Dialogue at a convention that brought together South Africans from across the country representing all sections of society.

This year, the National Dialogue process will spread across South Africa, reaching every community, every school, every university and college and every part of our society.

Under the guidance of the Eminent Persons Group, consisting of prominent and respected South Africans and led by an inclusive Steering Committee, these public dialogues will give the citizens of this country the opportunity to raise their concerns, aspirations and plans for the future.

These public dialogues will culminate in a National Convention where all of these conversations will be brought together to outline the actions that we must all take to build a better South Africa. These conversations will guide the formulation of an overarching national compact and of the next phase of our National Development Plan beyond 2030.

In building this national consensus, we must draw not only on the shared values of our Constitution, but on the unifying power of sport and the rich diversity of our culture.

As we celebrate those who have reached the heights of global achievement, we must appreciate how sport and cultural activities build a cohesive society.

Harnessing the spirit of the women of 1956, the youth of 1976 and the Constitution of South Africa of 1996, the year 2026 must be a year of transformative change.

This must be the year that we make South Africa stronger. We must fix local government. We must fight crime, corruption and restore trust in the criminal justice system. We must create jobs and livelihoods for every South African, and we must build a state that works for the people.

Above all, we must ensure that this rising tide lifts every South African.

As the economy grows, it should bring into its fold those who have lived on its margins for decades.

Our fight against crime should be felt in the townships and informal settlements as well as the suburbs.

Our schools and hospitals should make no distinction between those arriving at their doors.

In this way, we can build a stronger, more resilient and equal society – one that stands tall among the nations of the world.

We have indeed turned a corner. Now we must look ahead and move with speed.

I thank you.
