

Seventy years ago, thousands of women from all races marched to the Union Buildings – their hearts beating with a common purpose.

Armed with extraordinary cunning and resolve, these women braved police checkpoints and harassment.

In a voice loud and clear, they said:

“We shall not rest until we have won for our children their fundamental rights of freedom, justice and security.”

We recall the powerful image of Lilian Ngoyi, Helen Joseph, Sophie de Bruyn and Rahima Moosa carrying armfuls of petitions to lay at the doorstep of a Prime Minister who did not dare to meet them.

Every petition they handed over carried the weight of justice, each of the 100 000 signatures they had collected expressed a desire for freedom and equality.

For 30 minutes, the women stood on the steps of the Amphitheatre in silence, not singing, not speaking.

The powerful imagery of these women standing in silence illustrated their resolve and commitment to change.

Their silence reflected the deep emotional pain and frustration borne out of systemic apartheid oppression.

Their silence showcased the sorrow and anger that they felt in their fight for justice and equality.

Their silence was long enough to be unsettling to the apartheid officials who were watching them.

In that quiet moment, they showed the world that it was not the shouts of anger, but the stillness of determination, that moves mountains.

After the silence came the singing of the now eternally famous chant that has gone down in our struggle history, symbolising the powerful role played by women in the struggle against apartheid:

“Wathint’ abafazi, wathint’ imbokodo. You strike a woman; you strike a rock”.

It is said that the women’s chant rolled down the terraces of the Union Buildings, turning the seat of state power into a stage of protest, where courage met authority.

This evening, we are honoured to have among us Mam’ Sophie de Bruyn, one of the leaders of that march and a stalwart of our struggle for freedom.

She and many other women who have made enormous sacrifices in our struggle for freedom remind us that women have always been at the forefront of change, ready to stand up, speak out and never back down in the fight for justice.

To mark this anniversary, I ask you to rise and give a standing ovation to the women who marched on the Union Buildings in 1956 and to all the women of our land who continue to strive for the fundamental rights of freedom, justice and security.

It was 50 years ago, in that same spirit of defiance and struggle, that young people in Soweto walked out of school and marched towards Orlando Stadium to oppose the imposition of Afrikaans as a medium of instruction and the hated system of Bantu Education.

Their courage in the face of a brutally oppressive regime reverberated around the world and brought renewed attention to our struggle.

The determination and sacrifices of the youth of 1976 and of the generations of young people that would follow, continue to inspire us.

Thirty years ago, in 1996, the Constitutional Assembly adopted the text on which our democratic nation is founded.

Our Constitution reflects the spirit of the women who marched on the Union Buildings in 1956, the young people of 1976 and the many South Africans from all walks of life who fought for our freedom.

It is a Constitution that reflects the aspirations of the people of South Africa for a nation that is united and at peace; a nation that has thrown off the shackles of oppression and a divided past.

It is a Constitution that calls on us not only to redress the injustices of the past, but to progressively realise the right of all South Africans to housing, health care, food, water, social security, education and a better and prosperous life for all.

Today, we must realise these aspirations in a world that is rapidly changing. A world in which narrow self-interest has replaced the common good. A world in which trade is used as an instrument of coercion.

A world in which might is right and the powerful impose themselves on the weak. To navigate this new world, we must draw on our strength as a nation.

Our strength comes from our values. The values of dignity and equality, of non-racialism and non-sexism, diversity and of the inherent worth of every person.

It comes from our people, our tolerance, generosity, kindness and solidarity.

It comes from our steadfast commitment to uphold the rights and affirm the dignity of people in our society who face prejudice and discrimination, including persons with disabilities and members of the LGBTQI+ community.

Our strength comes from our determination and resolve. It comes from our creativity and inspiration.

Our strength comes from our natural endowments, the minerals in our earth and the richness of our soil, from the beauty of our mountains and shores.

Our strength comes from our institutions, which are robust and independent, and from the spirit of democracy and freedom that lives deep within us.

Our strength and power comes from one another. It comes from what we can achieve when we work together.

Our strength comes from our respect for one another, even as we may differ on various issues.

Our strength also comes from sportsmen and women who continue to lift the South African flag on the world stage and bring glory to our nation.

As we reflect on the state of our nation, we can say that we are stronger today than we were a year ago.

Our economy is growing again, and this growth is gathering pace.

While we have experienced four consecutive quarters of gross domestic product growth, we know that it has to grow much faster to meet our social and economic challenges.

We have achieved two consecutive primary budget surpluses.

Our credit rating has improved, interest rates are coming down and inflation is at its lowest level in 20 years.

We are on a clear path to stabilising our national debt. The Rand has strengthened against the Dollar.

The Johannesburg Stock Exchange, the largest stock exchange on the African continent, has performed exceptionally well over the past year.

This growth reflects broader economic recovery, investor confidence and increasing interest in South African equities.

Our borrowing costs have declined.

Through Operation Vulindlela, we have made significant progress in accelerating economic reform and opening the way for investment and competition.

We have brought an end to loadshedding and built a more dynamic and resilient energy system.

We have made progress in improving the performance of our ports and freight rail lines, steadily increasing the volume of goods that we move in and out of our country.

We have restored our passenger rail system, as more and more commuters are now able to travel to work on new locally-made trains – significantly reducing their transport costs.

We are investing across our country in roads, bridges, rail lines, ports, dams, wind and solar farms.

We have created over 2.5 million opportunities through the Presidential Employment Stimulus, mainly for young people and women.

The Expanded Public Works (EPWP) and the Community Work (CWP) programmes continue to offer job opportunities to many throughout our country.

Last year saw the highest Matric pass rate in our history, with more than two-thirds of all Bachelor passes coming from schools in the most disadvantaged communities.

As the economy grows, the rate of unemployment is starting to decline.

By expanding our social protection system through the Social Relief of Distress (SRD) Grant, we have reduced the number of people living in food poverty.

We are strengthening our anti-corruption laws.

Our country has been removed from the grey list of the Financial Action Task Force on money laundering and terrorism financing.

The work we have done to rebuild key institutions from state capture is showing results. The South African Revenue Service is once again a world- class tax authority.

The Investigating Directorate Against Corruption is making progress in prosecuting high-profile cases. Most importantly, our democratic system is maturing and growing stronger.

The Government of National Unity (GNU) has shown that it is possible for South Africans to come together from across the political spectrum to work on a common agenda for growth and progress.

Last year, we hosted the leaders of the world for a successful G20 Summit, which showcased our country’s strength on the global stage.

Confidence is rising among investors, businesses and consumers.

These improvements are the result of a determined effort across government and all of society. They show what is possible when we work with unity and purpose.

Now, we have a unique window of opportunity to translate these gains into sustained growth. Despite this progress, we must be honest about the challenges we still face.

Although we are moving forward, we must not claim any easy victories. We are still far from where we need to be.

For too many people, life remains hard. Jobs are scarce and opportunity is out of reach. South Africans are worried about violent crime and corruption.

They are concerned at the state of local government and its inability to deliver basic services in many parts of the country.

Above all, they are desperate for work and for an income to support their families.

We can only be strong when we are equal, when the progress we have made is shared by all South Africans.

The Constitution calls on us to work towards a society in which every South African has a fair chance to make a better life for themselves; in which every child receives a decent education and an opportunity to work and thrive.

A society in which we reclaim our public spaces and meet one another in the street as equals. In which the state works for the people and the corrupt face consequences.

This State of the Nation Address (SoNA) outlines the actions that we have taken since last year and the steps we will take this year to advance the strategic priorities of the GNU. 

These priorities are:

Firstly, to drive inclusive growth and job creation.

Secondly, to reduce poverty and tackle the high cost of living. Thirdly, to build a capable, ethical and developmental state.

This evening, we outline the work we must do together to build stronger communities and a stronger nation.

We outline the work we must do together to build a South Africa that is more prosperous, inclusive, peaceful, united and ultimately more equal.

A stronger South Africa must be safe and secure.

The cost of crime is measured in lives lost and futures cut short. It is felt also in the sense of fear that permeates our society and in the reluctance of businesses to invest.

Children here in the Western Cape are caught in the crossfire of gang wars. People are chased out of their homes by illegal miners in Kagiso in Gauteng. Women are murdered by their partners in their homes. Building sites are shut down by criminals.

This must and will change.

Organised crime is now the most immediate threat to our democracy, our society and our economic development.

Our primary focus this year is stepping up the fight against organised crime and criminal syndicates using technology, intelligence and integrated law enforcement.

We will tackle organised crime by consolidating intelligence at national level, identifying priority syndicates and deploying hand-picked, multi-disciplinary intervention teams focused on dismantling criminal networks.

To strengthen our fight against gang violence, I am deploying the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) to support the police, as we did to great effect with illegal mining.

I have directed the Minister of Police and the SANDF to develop a tactical plan where our security forces should be deployed within the next few days in the Western Cape and Gauteng to deal with gang violence and illegal mining.

As is required by the Constitution, I will inform the NA and the NCOP regarding the timing, place of deployment of our soldiers and what it will cost.

We have to act to rid our country of gang violence.

At the same time, we are implementing an integrated strategy to address the root causes of crime through coordinated interventions across society, from street lighting to access to social services.

We are going to tackle gun crime by streamlining legislation and regulations on licencing, possessing and trading in firearms and ammunition. We will increase enforcement of existing gun laws.

We are putting more boots on the ground through the recruitment this year of 5 500 additional police officers, adding to the 20 000 new officers we announced in previous SoNAs.

We are also addressing the threat posed by the infiltration of illegal and counterfeit goods to South African jobs and industry.

We are establishing a National Illicit Economy Disruption Programme that brings together key state agencies and other stakeholders, including the private sector.

Through effective use of data analytics and Artificial Intelligence, we will target high-risk sectors like tobacco, fuel, alcohol and other counterfeit products.

The hearings of the Madlanga Commission of Inquiry have exposed rampant corruption in the South African Police Service (SAPS) and some Metro Police departments through abuse of power.

We cannot tolerate this. The rule of law depends on a police service that is ethical, responsive and rooted in the communities that it serves.

The SAPS has established a task team to ensure that investigations arising from the Madlanga Commission are undertaken swiftly and without interference.

The State Security Agency will re-vet the Senior Management of the SAPS and Metro Police departments. The vetting process will include lifestyle audits.

As we have successfully done with previous commissions, we will use the recommendations of the Madlanga Commission to make far-reaching changes.

We are determined that the commission’s findings and recommendations will lay the basis for a fundamental reform of our criminal justice system.

We are confident that these efforts will succeed because the great majority of police officers are dedicated to upholding the law and diligently serving the people of South Africa.

Drawing on the success of Operation Vulindlela in advancing economic reform, we will use a similar approach to establish a hard-hitting new criminal justice reform initiative.

This will crack down on organised crime, corruption and the illicit firearms trade using a dedicated team in The Presidency to ensure that reforms are implemented across the system.

We are further intensifying the fight against corruption by strengthening bodies such as the Special Investigating Unit, National Prosecuting Authority and the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (DPCI/Hawks).

We will finalise government’s approach to the recommendation of the National Anti-Corruption Advisory Council on the establishment of a permanent, independent, overarching anti-corruption body.

We cannot accept that those who speak out against corruption are victimised and targeted.

The Whistle-Blower Protection Bill will be introduced in Parliament. Among other things, this will criminalise retaliation and provide psychosocial, legal and financial support to whistle-blowers.

There will be a special focus on restructuring our procurement system with a view to end corruption.

The Auditor-General of South Africa (AGSA) has reported that the majority of incidents of corruption originate in the procurement system. We cannot allow this cancer to continue and we must therefore act.

Measures will include the use of technology and the finalisation of new Public Procurement Act regulations by mid-2026.

We cannot fight organised criminals by treading softly. We must act with zero tolerance and bring the full force of the law to bear.

Let this message be clear: there will be no impunity for acts of corruption and criminality.

In addition to crime, water is now the single most important issue for many people in South Africa, from large cities like Johannesburg to smaller towns like Knysna and rural areas like Giyani.

We have all seen the pain that our people have been expressing through demonstrations in various parts of Gauteng. These protests have been fueled by frustrations over inadequate and unreliable access to basic services such as water.

I have directed the Minister of Water and Sanitation and her deputies as well as the Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs to attend to the water shortage problem and engage with our communities.

They are there at the moment, explaining to people precisely how government intends to immediately deal with the challenges our people are experiencing.

They informed me that the pipes that had been damaged are being repaired and the reservoirs are filling up again.

Poor planning and inadequate maintenance of water systems by many municipalities are the main cause of the problems we are going through now and are the reason that taps often run dry.

There is no silver bullet to address this challenge, which has its roots in systemic failures and many years of neglecting infrastructure.

To ensure water security in the long term, we are building new dams and upgrading existing infrastructure.

We have committed more than R156 billion in public funding for water and sanitation infrastructure over the next three years.

The construction of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project and other large-scale projects such as the Ntabelanga Dam, part of the Mzimvubu Water Project in the Eastern Cape, is advancing, and we are in the final stages of establishing a National Water Resource Infrastructure Agency to effectively manage and mobilise funding for the country’s water infrastructure.

However, the real challenge lies not in the availability of water, but in getting water to people’s taps.

The Water Services Amendment Bill will enable us to hold water service providers accountable for their performance and withdraw their license if they fail to deliver.

